This video is brought to you by net ease games.
Hey wisecrack, Dr. Chris here and today,
we're talking about a kid's cartoon that still haunts our grown-up nightmares.
Courage. The cowardly dog. This show is weird.
Between.
Its empty isolated setting.
It's bizarre plot lines and it's unsettling animation style.
The show is just off route.
[Inaudible].
And because of that, it terrified a generation of young viewers,
but wasn't creepy just for creepiness sake.
No.
Wait, because while it was busy, thoroughly freaking us out,
it was also doing something else showing us how fear could save or
ruin us.
[Inaudible].
Explain in this wisecrack edition on courage, the cowardly dog,
while courage may show us how fear shapes us. There's plenty of other movies,
TV shows, and even games that show us. We need to be fearless to survive.
Today's sponsor life after is just one example.
Life after is an open-world doomsday survival game that is free to play on iOS,
Android, and PC. As a player, you'll be able to explore the world by land, air,
and sea. You can collect resources, craft tools, and weapons,
and build a camp of your own. Oh, and along the way,
you'll battle hordes of zombies to survive. If you check the game out now,
you'll be able to participate in their awesome resonant evil crossover.
That will only last until the 17th.
Everyone that logs in now will receive a free motorcycle to use engage.
During the event,
you will also be able to access limited items from the first crossover event,
as well as new items like Albert Wesker, his outfit and Jill Valentines outfit.
You'll also be able to battle insane bosses from the resident evil series.
You can check all that out by using the link in the description to download the
game for free check out life after today,
and thanks to net EAs games for sponsoring this video.
We interrupt this program.
Cowardly.
For a quick recap, courage, the cowardly dog as well,
a fearful canine living in the middle of nowhere, Kansas,
with a kindly old Scottish lady Muriel and her cranky husband Eustace at this
plot line seems a bit prosaic.
The show itself is anything but courage is adventurous are not the wholesome
games of SpongeBob or the whimsically imaginative adventures of the Rugrats.
The reason for his distinctiveness is simple courage. The cowardly dog,
more than any other cartoon we can think of clearly went to great lengths to
scare the hell out of its young audience, whether it was parodying, hardcore,
horror, flicks, like the Exorcist or inventing its very own terrorists.
Like the vengeful three, headed chicken from outer space.
It really pulled out all the stops to ensure it gave us a childhood frightened.
And the it resonated so.
Well has everything to do with the protagonists.
See courage himself makes for an oddly perfect avatar for the psychology of a
child as a little purplish pink dog.
He's physically dwarfed by the world around him and only has a limited
understanding of it. Making much of it appear quite frightening,
just happens to be the same exact reason why small children are so easily
scared.
They're underdeveloped brains and limited pool of past experience to draw from,
make it impossible for them to accurately assess the threat,
which outside stimuli posts as a result, perfectly harmless.
Things might appear terrifying. Also like a young child,
courage has a restricted ability to communicate his fears.
Use this perpetually writes his screams of tear off as the panic reactions of
the dog while Muriel is much more compassionate.
She is similarly unable to understand what has him so spooked.
So he's left alone to deal with fears,
which no one else seems to understand like a young child who can't comprehend,
why his parents insist on sending him to bed.
When there are clearly monsters under there.
[Inaudible] in the attic.
He shaped happy to me.
Understanding courage as an avatar for a young child becomes a sort of
heartbreaking exercise. When you consider the poor puffs early years,
they were marked by the severe trauma of watching his parents launched into
space by a deranged veterinarian.
And while this is a typically absurd plot detail for our cartoon network show,
it also acts as a weirdly effective analogy for childhood trauma witnessing
their loved ones in danger, from a crazy vet or whatever else,
fundamentally shatters a child's sense of safety.
The aftereffects of such a huge shock to their developing psyche can linger for
a long time. As a result of his trauma,
courage now lives in a heightened state anxiously expecting the worst at every
turn in particular, he has developed a clear case of separation,
anxiety panicking.
Every time Muriel leaves his site and constantly worrying about her safety as is
common for children who experienced loss at a young age.
He now lives in fear of his other loved ones. Leaving.
As well.
Episodes begin with him freaking out about a danger that no one else has
bothered by. But importantly he is sometimes incredibly wrong. In the episode.
Heads of beef courage is convinced that the new burger joint in town is secretly
killing off its customers to use them as meat Sweeney, Todd style,
after thoroughly freaking out and knocking the owner unconscious in his bed to
rescue use this courage discovers that he was wrong all along his mind has been
so molded by his early experiences that he lives in a constant state of terror,
which can cause him to panic unnecessarily.
That sure is one good looking statue where you can we eat it. However.
Because he lives in a place riddled with aliens,
giant insects and the like courages initial fears tend to be pretty well founded
more often than not. In fact, thanks to his hyper alert nature.
He's actually frequently able to save the day while used to send Muriel,
continually walk blindly into all kinds of danger, courage, spies,
the threat early enough to take action.
The two parts of his name are what makes him the show's hero.
He is cowardly enough to feel threatened by all the crazy stuff.
Life throws at him, but he has the courage to power through it,
to protect the people he cares about things I do for love.
This is important in making courages, neurosis, not only well-founded,
but actively lifesaving. The show tells us something about fear itself,
namely that the emotion isn't a weakness,
rather it's a natural and necessary part of life. Key to keeping us safe.
This is underscored by the introduction of a recurrent character known simply as
the computer,
a well-spoken AI who lives inside courageous computer and who like an awful
lot of people is kind of a jerk to him.
You're such a lousy typist.
In particular, the computer seems to take issue with the whole idea of fear.
He prides himself on being a cold calculating machine.
When a freak storm allows him to take control over Muriel's body.
He uses it to perform a series of death,
defying stunts to show just how unafraid he is,
but being fearless isn't necessarily a strength.
It might just mean you don't value anything or anyone enough to worry about them
being harmed.
When it's not like I'm scared or anything.
It's just that if there's an electrical surge,
I could crash get Y Zippo.
Again, it's courage is overwhelming concern for the safety of those around him,
which regularly inspires him to save the day.
But while fear can be helpful or even fun in the right context,
it can also ruin people while courage has basically internalized his trauma.
Many of the shows,
buildings reveal what can happen when inner pain is expressed.
Outwardly episodes, the tower of doctors, a lost and the shadow of courage,
both feature characters who break bad as a result of their own suffering in the
first doctor is a loss is a mad scientist who is so deeply depressed,
that he launches a barrage of emotion,
altering cannon balls to make everyone as unhappy as he is in the latter
episode,
the shadow takes the terrorizing courage and his family only stopping when
courage finally manages to connect with him emotionally and convince him to
follow his dreams rather than ruining other people's lives.
I dunno how to make it in show biz, but there are the real stars.
Why don't we hang with them? You meet become the shadow of a real star.
It's worth a trial.
These episodes offer a far more complicated idea of evil.
They suggest that much of the time,
the people who scare us the most are the ones most wrapped up in their own
fears. The lesson, if we let it overwhelm us, fear makes monsters of us all.
What's the good of having all the money in the world.
If it doesn't bring in their happiness and then five not happy,
no one deserves to be happy. And if you think we're.
Reading too much into this terrifying children's show, guess what? The creator,
John R Dilworth agrees with us saying I don't portray psychopaths.
Those don't interest me.
I'm very much interested in the repressed traumas of villains.
The idea of going deeper,
trying to assign an etymology of bad behavior to childhood trauma is based on
actual science. That's the science of psychiatry.
Nowhere is this more true than with Eustace?
The most constant source of fear encourages life,
a grumpy old man who never has a kind word to say,
and mostly seems to exist only to abuse. The other members of his household use.
This would have been tragically familiar for too many young viewers,
but we learn more about his past childhood throughout the show.
And it turns out that his own hostility is rooted in the treatment he received
as a child.
The way he treats courage is just a replication of the way his own mother
treated him.
Stupid boy, stupid dog.
You rating him constantly and favoring his older brother all to ensure that he
lived in constant fear of not measuring up. See.
Elated use lists.
And while it's heavy stuff for creepy kids, cartoon,
it's also sadly true to life.
Many adults carry their own childhood abuse with them inflicting the fear that
they felt onto others, rather than learning to process it in a healthy way,
stope a dog.
But while courage extends a lot of sympathy to many of its more monstrous
characters,
it also has a pretty empowering central message that it's important to take
action in the face of those who make us feel unsafe,
even if it can be a really scary thing to do. And one of the series,
most infamous episodes freaky. Fred,
the family is visited by a relative named Fred who narrates his actions with a
rhyming inner monologue.
That's when my tired eyes beheld, doggy dog like dog,
he spelled D O G is what he spelled.
And that's how I spell no shorty.
And compulsively shaves people's hair off because it makes them feel naughty
because Muriel and Eustis ignore courages protests about their creeping new
house.
Guests thread is able to trap courage in the bathroom and forcibly shave him.
Fred is one of the many figures from courage who lingers with viewers years
later,
even if they struggle to put a finger on exactly what made him so unsettling.
Hello friend, my name is Fred.
The words you hear are in my head, I say, I said,
my name is Fred, and I've been
naughty.
Back though.
The tail is basically a cartoon network friendly story about a child predator.
Fred is terrorizing courage in his own home while other family members refuse to
acknowledge that this creepy compulsive Rhymer is dangerous.
Despite our protagonist warnings,
fear has an ability to make us feel unworthy or cowardly.
This is something many abusers prey on the courage.
His fears are valid and he deserves to have them taken seriously. Fortunately,
he eventually realizes this and makes a call to Fred's mental institution.
The villain is promptly carted away. The episode,
the mask widely regarded as one of the show's best returns to this idea of how
immobilizing fear can be with a tale about a couple of friends named kitty.
And bunny. I was forced to leave my home and my best friend.
Some have argued that it's a thinly veiled allegory for a same-sex couple bunny
has been forbidden from seeing kitty and is being held captive by her vicious
partner, Madoff kitty.
Now wearing the titular mask has come to believe that all canines are evil and
attacks courage.
Every time they meet while kitty lashes out in the same way that Eustace doctors
are lost.
And so many others do Bunny's fear pushes her to accept the abusive treatment
she receives from her boyfriend,
convinced that she deserves nothing better than again,
wrapping heavy subjects like domestic abuse and homophobia up in its colorful
cartoon language.
The show gets at how easy it is for us to be made afraid of who you really are
to feel like we need to hide ourselves. No matter the cost of happiness,
watching kitty and money write-off triumphantly after courage,
rescues them is a bright,
brilliant way to tell a young audience that this simply isn't.
True [inaudible].
While courage is attention is typically drawn towards the monster of the week.
Deep down he shares bunny, same ultimate fear, not being good enough courage,
clings to Muriel because she is the one person left who reaffirms his sense that
he has value.
And yet he puts up with Eustace is abuse because on some level he doesn't
entirely believe it. That nagging voice we all have on some level.
The one that insists that we aren't good enough is even given physical shape in
the series finale. Perfect. The episode season,
old school teacher dub the perfectionist,
demanding that courage prove his worth by performing a never ending series of
tasks up to her impossible standards. The more he struggles,
the more she berates him,
steadily grinding away at his confidence and adding to his anxiety.
By the time she ordered him to sleep perfectly,
which prevents him from actually sleeping at all.
He's pretty much losing his mind.
That is until a friendly green fish in his bathtub offers some Sage advice to
stop aiming for perfection and embrace who he is.
With all your imperfections you can do.
And just like that,
he is able to vanquish the nagging voice of the perfectionist and the fear that
she feeds on.
And so one of the weirdest darkest most soul rattling shows that the cartoon
network ever aired comes to a genuinely heartwarming conclusion.
There's no such thing as perfect.
You'll beautiful as you are.
Courage was able to get inside our heads when we were kids,
because as disturbing as it might be to admit it really spoke our language.
And one of the reasons it continues to resonate is that it isn't just invested
in scaring its viewers.
It also wants to teach us about what it means to be scared that our fears
matter, even if others dismiss them,
that we can overcome the things we're scared of.
And ultimately that there was no in being afraid.
So what do you think wise crack is courage, the cowardly dog in all,
its weirdness a wonderful exploration of childhood fear. And is that why?
It means so much to us as adults, let us know in the comments, Vic,
thanks to our patrons for all your support hit that subscribe button.
Like you have no fears and be sure to ring that bell and as always,
thanks for watching peace.
[Inaudible].